In this video I'll provide you with an introduction to virtualization where we'll learn many of the
basic concepts of what a virtual machine is what a hypervisor is and how we can provide resources to
our virtual machines that are actually the shared physical resources of an ESX host.
So what does a virtual machine.
Well it's very similar to a physical server where you have a operating system and the operating system
has no idea that it's going to be running on a virtual machine.
So if I have Windows or Linux running on my VM that operating system is called the guest operating system
and it has no awareness that it's running as a via now a virtual machine does not have its own dedicated
hardware.
But like I said the guest operating system doesn't know that.
So a virtual machine will run on a physical server with many other virtual machines.
They'll share the physical resources of the host.
And this is the first big benefit of virtualization.
We can run many machines on shared hardware each with their own independent guest operating system and
those virtual machines can share a common set of physical resources like CPQ memory network storage
so unlike a physical server the virtual machine does not truly have its own dedicated physical hardware.
It's using the shared hardware of any OS X I host.
And that's what the ESX host is.
This is the actual physical server that are virtual machines will run on.
So the virtual machine is almost like a program running on a computer.
And we have different programs that consume different amounts of resources and we have different VAMC
running on the same physical host.
And some of the AMS may consume more CPQ some may consume less.
Some might consume more memory or produce more storage traffic other virtual machines less so the ESX
host is like our physical server.
And ESX is the operating system that we install on that physical server.
And ESX is what we refer to as a type 1 hypervisor.
That means it runs right on the hardware.
It doesn't require any other operating system.
So if you're familiar with VM or workstation that's a hypervisor that runs on top of Windows.
There's no underlying operating system on the ESX host.
It's purely ESX by running on physical hardware and then the virtual machines run on top of VSX high
and can utilize the physical resources of that host.
So again here we see many virtual machines running on the same ESX host again utilizing the shared of
physical resources provided by that host and in ESX I hosted is the rephrase now are ESX host is an
example of a type 1 hypervisor in a hypervisor adds what we call a layer of abstraction.
So there is a layer of abstraction between the virtual machines and the physical resources.
Now what does this layer of abstraction mean what let's take a moment to think about this.
So let's say for example I'm sitting on the couch and I have myself a bowl of Eminem's and I see my
son coming towards the living room and I take a napkin and I cover up that bowl of Eminem's I've just
created myself a layer of abstraction.
Right.
I've hidden those underlying physical resources from the people who want to consume those resources.
My son and that's kind of like what a layer of abstraction does on the ESX host it creates this layer
between the virtual machines and the physical hardware and it gives us this management capability where
we can intelligently divide up those resources.
So for example as a virtual machine is trying to access physical memory.
It's going to access that memory through this hypervisor layer of abstraction and now we can intelligently
decide.
Well the first we might be able to access four gigs of memory and the second VM might be able to access
two gigs of memory and maybe the third VM will take precedence over the other two victims and we can
establish all of these controls because of this hypervisor layer that rides in-between the virtual machine
and the physical resources.
So my VM are not actually seeing the physical resources at all.
They're seeing a virtual sized version of those physical resources that we can control because of this
layer of abstraction that exists.
And one of the most important resources that's shared across virtual machines are my CPA is.
So in this slide we see and ESX I host and this ESX host has four physical seepages.
Right let's assume that those are four processor of course on the same socket.
So we've got a situation in which we've got four processor course and we've got a lot of virtual machines
here.
Here you can see we've got 12 virtual machines displayed.
So we've got these 12 virtual machines that are sharing for physical processor of course.
This is called oversubscription.
We may only need four processor cores to meet the requirements of 12 virtual machines because odds are
all of my Reems are not going to be consuming as much as they possibly can at all times.
That's what the concept of oversubscription is all about.
And that's how we efficiently utilize the resources of our ESX I host Think about it this way.
Let's say that we have a restaurant and we know that we're going to have a certain number of people
that visit our restaurant everyday.
So maybe for example we'll know that we'll have 200 people who are going to come to our restaurant everyday.
Well I may just simply build enough tables in this restaurant to see 50 people at any given moment so
I'll build my restaurant for my normal usage.
I might have 200 people per day but odds are I'm not going to have all of those people at the exact
same moment.
Someone come for lunch some will come for breakfast some for dinner.
And so it would really be wasteful of me to size my restaurant big enough to seat 200 people.
Because I'm probably not going to have that many people at once.
The same concept applies to virtualization.
I'm not going to size my physical C-p resources for my worst case scenario.
Now there may be times where all 12 of these virtual machines have a CPQ intensive running task right.
And that's just like 200 people showing up to my restaurant at once if all 12 of these VMs are carrying
out some sort of CPQ intensive task.
They're going to be waiting.
There's going to be slowness just like the restaurant example of 200 people showing up at once.
There's too many people and not enough physical resources not enough tables available.
So it's always a balancing act when you're creating your ESX host because you don't want to purchase
a bunch of unnecessary physical hardware.
But on the other hand you don't want bad performance.
So we always have to find that that sort of fine line.
So as we go ahead and create our virtual machines we can size them individually so we could say maybe
one VM will get four virtual C.P. use and one VM will get to virtual Seip use and one VM will get one
virtual CPO and all that does is govern you know how many processor cores each VM is allowed to take
advantage of.
So our hypervisor Lehre or our layer of abstraction gives us the ability to have a shared set of physical
C-p use that are used by a group of virtual machines and memory virtualization is a very similar concept.
I'll probably have virtual machines running on any ESX I host that exceed the amount of memory that
that host can actually deliver.
So maybe if I add up all of my VMS over here the total memory that I'll allocate to them will be 48
gigabytes but maybe in my host I'll actually have 24 gigabytes over subscribe just like we talked about
with.
And as these virtual machines need to utilize memory as they actually require those memory pages those
memory pages will be mapped back to physical memory on the ESX host that's shared by all of my virtual
machines.
So I kind of call it the four food groups right.
The ESX I host provides CPQ provides memory and it also provides network virtualization and storage
virtualization and the network virtualization part of our picture looks a little bit different than
the other resources that we've already looked at.
So from a network virtualization perspective we now have this component here called a standard switch.
This is a virtual switch and like I said in my VMS work pretty similarly to the way that a physical
server works.
So when I create a virtual machine I need to plug it into a network just as if I was putting a physical
computer on the network I have to do the same thing with a VM and I have to plug it into a network and
will take a little bit closer of a look at that later in this course.
But essentially what I'm going to do is I'm going to establish a virtual connection from this VM to
a port and a for a standard switch.
And by the way my VMT that are running on this host they can all communicate via that VSE for standards
which they can talk to each other and they can communicate without their traffic ever even leaving the
ESX host.
But if there's something out there that they need to communicate with like a physical server.
They can do that through of these very standards which have a connection to a physical network and be
able to talk to devices that are outside of that ESX host.
So that's the purpose of the VSE standard switch.
And of network virtualization is to provide network connectivity to our virtual machines and storage
virtualization is very similar in my virtual machine is going to have virtual disks.
Remember I've got a guest operating system running in each of these virtual machines like Windows or
Linux.
Both of those guest operating systems need to be able to access their C-Drive or their their files that
make up that VM.
And so as the virtual machine generates storage activity that storage activity in the form of scuzzy
commands is captured by the hypervisor and are redirected to the appropriate storage location and that's
the other purpose of the hypervisor is to provide access to a variety of different methods of storage.
We'll talk about those later on in the course like virtual scene VM FS and FS virtual volumes but at
this point what we really want to understand in this first lesson is simply the fact that I have multiple
virtual machines running on a physical ESX I host and the physical ESX I host provides access to our
four food groups.
Memory network storage.
Now one more thing about our virtual machines that's important to understand at this point.
A virtual machine is made up of two major pieces.
We have the virtual machine files and the live state of the virtual machine.
So let's talk about the live state first.
Every virtual machine that's running is going to have contents in memory.
This is all the programs that are running in the current state of the virtual machine the virtual machine
is going to be using time slots on processors.
It's going to have a virtual neck that's connected to a port and a virtual switch and it's going to
send scuzzy commands that are intercepted by the ESX I host and passed along to a storage adapter.
So this is what's happening in my virtual machine right now at this given moment the virtual hardware
that we're providing it and the contents of memory at any given moment.
That's what's running on the ESX host.
But the virtual machine is also made up of a set of files.
Right.
Some of these files include our VM decay file the virtual disk of our virtual machine the VM X-File
our configuration file and those files are located on a data store and a data store is simply any storage
technology that has been prepared to Houghs virtual machine files.
When I shut down my VM there is no more contents of memory.
The virtual machines not being schedule a lot of processor.
It's not generating any network or storage traffic.
When I shut down my VM it still register and do a host we still know which host it's going to run on.
Next time we powered up.
But basically when a VM is powered on all that really remains is the set of files that we're going to
use to boot that virtual machine up next time.
So our virtual machines are made up of the live state.
That's the part that's running on the ESX host.
That's the contents of memory the virtual hardware.
And they're also made up of a set of files located on a data store.
So that's what our virtual machines are and this is basically the building block of the software defined
datacenter.
All right so when we start taking physical servers and virtualizing them creating many VM is running
on multiple ESX hosts and doing things like having virtualize networks having storage arrays that are
virtual machines utilized for storage and things like that we've gone to a software defined datacenter
and if I want to I can create multiple virtual data centers in the same building I can create a virtual
data center that spans multiple physical locations.
I have all kinds of options and that's the biggest difference between a physical data center and a software
defined datacenter is the fact that a software defined datacenter is not defined by four walls and an
air conditioning unit and power like a physical datacenter is a software defined datacenter can span
physical locations.
We can make it bigger.
We can make it smaller.
It's scalable and dynamic.
Finally one last term I want to talk about.
What is the cloud.
While we're going to keep this very simple so a private cloud is essentially and a virtual arised environment.
I've got a bunch of hosts.
I've got virtual machines running on it.
And that's my own little private cloud my own equipment.
And there's no kind of third party hosting service or anything like that.
Now if I decide to I can also utilize the public cloud and I like to think of the public cloud as like
a utility company.
Right.
So if you're building a new house you can just call the power company and get your power turned on.
You don't have to put generators in your basement or solar all over the roof.
You can just call the power company and get power.
That's kind of like the public cloud.
You can just simply utilize their existing physical infrastructure.
They have the servers they have the storage capacity the network capacity to run virtual machines.
And that's what a public cloud provider is.
It's sort of a utility provider for compute and storage capacity.
AWOS is definitely the most well known example.
And I also teach AWOS classes as well.
They do a lot of live AWOS classes and AWOS and VM Ware are definitely getting more closely integrated
as time goes on.
So if you're ever curious about any of that stuff or you ever want to take a life class feel free to
reach out to me LinkedIn and I'll be glad to help you out.
But yeah that's right.
That's what the cloud is.
Right so public cloud think AWOS think you know Google think whoever a public cloud provider that's
their physical hardware their computer and storage and then you can also do something called the hybrid
cloud where you have some stuff running in a private cloud and some stuff running in the public cloud.
All right.
So let's review.
A virtual machine has a guest operating system.
It has virtual hardware doesn't actually have any physical hardware.
That's that's truly dedicated to it and many virtual machines can run on a single hypervisor ESX is
a type 1 hypervisor and that's our physical server and the resources of that ESX host are shared across
multiple virtual machines and they're presented to virtual machines using what we call a layer of abstraction.
We can have multiple virtual data centers in the same building.
We can have virtual data centers that span multiple physical locations and we also briefly introduced
what a cloud service provider is with the most common example being AWOS.